docs: clarify cumulative aggregations (#47545)
metabase/metabase: docs/questions/query-builder/expressions/cumulativesum.md

---
title: Cumulative sum
---

# Cumulative sum

Cumulative sum computes the rolling sum (also known as running total) of a column across a breakout.

## Syntax

> You can use the pre-defined "Cumulative sum" metric, or a custom expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the predefined "Cumulative sum" metric, or a custom expression:
```

```
CumulativeSum(column)
```

For example:

```
CumulativeSum([Total])
```

Cumulative sum can only be used in the query builder's **Summarize** step — you cannot use cumulative sum to create a custom column or in a custom filter.

## How cumulative sum is computed

Under the hood, cumulative sum is computed in three steps:

1. Group records using the breakout from the **Group by** block,
2. Compute the sum within each group,
3. For each group, compute the cumulative sum of the sums for all previous groups up to the current group.

Because cumulative sum uses values from previous rows, the sort order in the breakout column matters.

> For example, if you have a table with data grouped by month, cumulative sum will be computed like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you have a table with data grouped by month, Metabase will compute the cumulative sum like this:
```

| Month    | `Sum([Column])` | `CumulativeSum([Column])` |
| -------- | --------------- | ------------------------- |
| July     | 5               | 5                         |
| November | 4               | 5+4 = 9                   |
| March    | 2               | 5 + 4 + 2 = 11            |

If the sort is changed (while values remain the same), then the cumulative sum changes as well:

| Month    | `Sum([Column])` | `CumulativeSum([Column])` |
| -------- | --------------- | ------------------------- |
| March    | 2               | 2                         |
| July     | 5               | 2 + 5 = 7                 |
| November | 4               | 2 + 5 + 4 = 11            |

> You can preview and check the results of your summary by clicking on the ▶ button to the right of the **Summarize** block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Cumulative sum with multiple breakouts

Because `CumulativeSum` uses other rows, the order of data is important. When there are multiple breakout columns specified in **Group by**, there are multiple potential sort orders, so in Metabase, cumulative sum will handle it as follows:

> 1. Sort by the first breakout column,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Sort by the first breakout column to determine previous rows.
```

2. Break out by the first column and any additional columns.
3. Compute cumulative sums for the additional breakouts over the first column

> So what "previous rows" means is determined by the first column in the breakout. Keep in mind that cumulative sum will use the first breakout column for sort _regardless of any additional sort specified in the **Sort** block_. **Sort** block applies only to the _results_ of the **Summarize** block, rather than the logic within **Summarize** block.

Reviewer: Same comments here, as this copy is repeated. So maybe we should consolidate?

Adding a **Sort** block only changes how data is displayed, but it will not change how the cumulative sum is computed.

If the order of breakouts is switched, and the data is grouped first by category, then by date, then the cumulative sum will be computed for the same month, but over categories.

![Summarize block Cumulative sum for products over categories sorted by category](../../images/cumsum-reverse-breakouts-qb.png)

![Results of Cumulative sum for products over categories sorted by category](../../images/cumsum-reverse-breakouts-result.png)

For example, cumulative sum for Gadgets in July 2022 will be determined by summing results for July 2022 over this category and previous categories (determined by alphabetical order).

Even though this result looks similar to the previous cumulative sum results (grouped by `Created At` and `Category`, sorted by `Category`), the actual values are different. In most cases, you probably want cumulative sum by `Created At` and `Category` (in that order) , sorted by `Category` (for readabilility), instead of cumulative sum by `Category` and then `Created At`.

## Related functions

> ### SQL

Reviewer: Nice, simple SQL examples here.
